---
layout: post
title:  "Understanding Michael Porter"
date:   2022-01-11 20:36:13 +0530
categories: books
tags: business strategy
---

**The Essential Guide to Competition and Strategy**

**The Fundamental Equation:**  Profit = Price - Cost

**Strategy** - The essence of strategy is choosing what not to do. It explains how an organization faced with competition will achieve superior results. **A good competitive strategy will  achieve sustainably superior performance.** It can be viewed as building defences against the competitive forces or finding a position in the industry where the forces are weakest.  
**Good strategies are like shelters in storm.**
    - If you have a strategy, you should be able to link it directly to your P&L. 

- Business is a collection of value-creating activities.  
- Competition focuses on meeting customer needs than on demolishing rivals. Business is different than sports. Sports is zero sum while business is more open ended, there are so many needs to serve, there are so many ways to win. In the vast majority of businesses there are no such thing as "the best". 
- Competitive convergence - over time, rivals begin to look alike as one difference after another erodes. Customers are left with nothing but price as the basis for their choices. 
- Economies of scale - There are economies of scale and advantages of being bigger in most businesses but before you assume that bigger is always better, it is critical to run the numbers for your business. Too often the goal is chosen because it sounds good, whether or not economies of scale support the business. 
    - Eg. General motors was the world's largest car company for a period of decades, a fact that didn't prevent its descent into bankruptcy. 
    -**Companies only have to be "big enough", which rarely means that they have to dominate.**
- **Scale curve** - It shows the costs of production as a function of the total quantity produced. A downward-sloping cost curve means the company with the biggest volume will have the lowest unit costs. 
- **Perfect Competition** - Evenly matched rivals selling equivalent products go head to head, driving prices and profits down. According to classical theory, a **Perfect Competition** is the most efficient way to promote social welfare. It restricts choices, value is often destroyed. 
- **Competition to be unique** - It's about uniqueness in the value your create and how you create. 
    - Strategic competition means choosing a path different from that of others. Focus on delivering superior value for chosen customers. Price is just one competitive variable. 
    - **Competing to be the best feeds imitation, competing to be unique feeds innovation.** 

       

| Be the best | Be Unique |
| ------ | ------ |
| Be number 1 | Earn higher returns |
| Focus on market share | Focus on profit |
| Serve "best customer" with best product | Meet diverse needs of target customers |
| Zero sum | Positive sum |


- Competing for Profits 
    - The real point of competition is not to beat your rivals. It's not about winning a sale. The point is to earn profits. Competing for profits is more complex. 
    - **Customers are always happier to pay less and get more**
- **Porter's Five Forces**
    - The intensity of rivalry 
        - Industry is composed of many competitors or if competitors are roughly equal in size and power. Often an industry leader has the ability to enforce practices that help the whole industry. 
        - Slow growth provokes battles over market share 
        - High exit barriers prevent companies from leaving the industry. This happens, for example, if companies have invested in specialised assets that can't be sold. Excess capacity typically hurts an industry's profitability. 
        - Rivals are irrationally committed to the business, that is, financial performance is not the overriding goal. For example, a state owned enterprise might be propped for reasons of national pride or because it provides jobs. 
        - **Price competition, is the most damaging form of rivalry.**
    - The bargaining power of buyers
        - If you've powerful buyers (i.e. customers), they will use their clout to force prices down. They may also demand that you put more value into the product or service. In either case, industry profitability will be lower because customers will capture more of the value themselves. 
        - Eg. Cement industry in US vs Mexico
            - US very large buyers squeeze profits 
            - Mexico large number of small buyers. High profits. 
        - When you assess buyer power, the channels through which products are delivered can be important as the end users. This is important when the channel influences the purchase decisions of the end user customers. Within an industry there may be segments of buyers with more or less negotiating power, and with greater or less price sensitivity. Buyers are more likely to exercise their negotiating leverage if they are price sensitive. 
        - Both industrial customers and consumers tend to be more price sensitive when they're buying is: 
            - Undifferentiated 
            - Expensive relative to their costs or income 
            - Inconsequential to their own performance 
    - The bargaining power of suppliers 
        - If you've powerful suppliers, they will use their negotiating leverage to charge higher prices or to insist on more favourable terms. In either case, industry profitability will be lower because suppliers will capture more of the value themselves. 
        - When you analyse the supplier power, be sure to include all of the purchased inputs that go into a product or service, including labour. 
    - Threat of substitutes 
        - Products or services that meet the same basic need as the industry's product in a different way - put a cap on industry profitability. 
        - Since substitutes are not direct rivals it makes them difficult to anticipate or even to see once they appear. 
        - How to assess - Look to the economics, specifically to whether the substitute offers an attractive price-performance trade-off relative to the industry's product. 
    - Threat of new entrants - Entry barriers protect an industry from newcomers who would add new capacity
        - How to assess 
            - Does producing in larger volumes translate into lower unit costs? 
                - If there are economies of scale, at what volumes they kick in?
                - Where do these economies come from?
            - Will customers incur any switching costs in moving from one supplier to another 
            - Network effects - Does the value to customers increase as more customers user a company's products
            - What is the price of admission for a company to enter the business?
            - Do incumbents have advantages independent of size that new entrants can't access?
            - Does government policy restrict or prevent new entrants?
            - What kind of retaliation should a potential entrant expect should it choose to enter?
- **How to assess buyer or supplier power**
    - They are large and concentrated relative to a fragmented industry (Think goliath versus davids). 
    - What % of industry purchases does a buyer/supplier represent? - Look at the data and map out how it is trending. 
    - How painful would it be to lose that supplier or that customer?  - Industries with high fixed costs are especially vulnerable to large buyers. 
    - The industry needs them more than they need the industry
        - Doctors and pilots to cite examples
    - Switching costs work in their favour - 
        - This occurs for a supplier when an industry is tied to it, as for example, the PC industry has been to Microsoft
        - This occurs for a buyer when he can drop one vendor for other 
    - Differentiation works in their favour 
        - When buyers see little differentiation in the industry's products 
    - They can credibly threaten to vertically integrate into producing the industry's product itself. Producers of beer and soft drinks have used this tactic to keep a lid on the prices of beverage containers. 
- **Complements - The Sixth Force**
    - Products and services used together with an industry's products. For eg. Computer hardware and software. 
- Managers often mistakenly assume that a high-growth industry will be an attractive one. But growth is no guarantee that the industry will be profitable. For eg. Growth might put suppliers in drivers's seat, low entry to barriers might attract new rivals. 
- Industry Structure - A more powerful tool to assess the dynamics of competition.  
- Profit = Price - Cost 
    - Costs include all of the resources used in competing, including the cost of capital. 
    - Produce goods and services whose value exceeds the sum of the costs of all the inputs. 
- How to do industry analysis
    - Define relevant industry by both its product scope and geographic scope 
    - Identify the players constituting each of the five forces and where appropriate, segment them in groups 
    - Assess the underlying drivers of each force 
    - Step back and assess the overall industry structure 
    - Analyse recent and likely future changes for each force
    - How can you position yourself in relation to five forces 
- **Competitive Advantage**
    - If you've a real competitive advantage, it means that compared with rivals, you operate at a lower cost, command a premium price, or both. 
    - **ROIC** - Return on invested capital should be measured but a lot of companies measure **ROS** (Return on sales). 
    - In measuring competitive advantage, returns must be measured relative to other companies within the same industry, rivals who face a similar competitive environment or a similar configuration of the five forces. 
    - **The Right analytics - Why some companies are more profitable than others?**
        - Relative price - To get premium price offer something unique and valuable to customers. Ability to command higher price is the essence of differentiation. 
        - Relative cost 
        - The value chain - The sequence of activities your company performs to design, produce, sell, deliver and support its products is called the value chain. 
            - Start by laying out the industry value chain 
            - Compare your value chain to industry 
            - Zero in on price drivers, those activities have a high current or potential impact on differentiation 
            - Zero in on cost drivers, paying special attention to activities that represent a large or growing percentage of costs 
        - Business is a collection of value-creation activities. Value chain is important to analyse both company's relative cost and value. Value chain focuses managers on the specific activities that generate cost and create value for customers. 
    - Can you execute your way to competitive advantage? 
        - **Competitive Advantage** - difference in relative price or relative costs that arises because of differences in the activities being performed. 
        - **Operation effectiveness** - A company's ability to perform similar activities better than the rivals. 
        - Simply improving **Operation effectiveness** does not provide a robust **Competitive Advantage** because rarely are "best practices" sustainable, its rivals tend to copy is quickly. This treadmill of competition is called **Hypercompetition**. 
- **What is Strategy?**
    - Normative, not descriptive 
    - Content, not process
    - **Where you want to be, not how you got there**
    - Great strategies are rarely, if ever, built on a particular detailed or concrete prediction of future. 
    - Value creation 
        - **Value proposition** - The first test of strategy whether your value proposition is different from your rivals. If you're trying to serve the same customers and meet the same needs and sell at the same relative price, Then you don't have a strategy. 
            - Customers - Which customers you are going to serve 
            - Needs - Which needs you're going to meet
            - **Relative Price** What relative price will provide acceptable value for customers 
        - A tailored **Value Chain** - Choose to perform different activities or perform activities differently. 
    - **Trade-Offs** - strategic equivalent of a fork in the road. If you take one path you cannot simultaneously take another. Trade-offs are choices that make strategy sustainable because they are not easy to match or neutralise. 
        - Makes choices of what not to do as important as what to do. 
        - **Most people tend to believe that more is always better. More customers, more products, more services mean more sales and profits.**
        - **Another misconception is whether it is possible to sustain competitive advantage. This is a world in which anything can be copied, a world in which the the best you can hope for in competing is a series of very temporary advantages. **
        - Competition is full of trade-offs. These lie at the very heart of strategy. 
        - Why do trade-offs arise
            - Product features - The product that best meets one set of needs performs poorly in meeting others. 
            - Activities - Configuration of activities cannot deliver results for all set of customers 
            - Inconsistencies in image or reputation - Eg. Italian car maker Ferrari launching a mini van. 
        - Cost Vs Quality trade-off - It is believed that to get better quality customers need to spend more money. This is not true. Answer is **Yes, but**. Yes, quality is free when higher quality means eliminating defects and waste. **Operation effectiveness**
            - In 1990, Lexus was able to delivery more luxury than cadillac at the same price by following best operational practices. 
        - Product features can be copied, services can be copied, ways of delivering can be copied but where there are trade-offs, the copycat will pay economic penalty. 
    - **Fit** - The Amplifier 
        - Good strategies don't rely on just one thing. Good strategies depend on the connection among many things, on making interdependent choices. 
        - Fit means the value or cost of one activity is affected by the way other activities are performed. 
        - Companies with strong fit are typically superior in both strategy and execution, and thus they are less likely to attract imitators in the first place. When activities affect each other flaws in one will impair overall performance. This tends to shine a spotlight on the weakness.
        - How fit works
            - Basic consistency - each activity is aligned with company's value propositions and each contributes incrementally to its dominant themes. 
                - Eg. speed for Zara. At every step in the value chain, Zara has configured its activities so that nothing takes longer than it needs to, its design teams are configured for rapid response, its plants are located nearby, its own fleet of trucks ensures rapid delivery etc. 
            - Real Synergy - When activities complement or reinforce each other. Where the value of each activity is raised by other. 
                - Eg. Netflix ratings and huge library are complementary. The reviews help members to broaden their movie-watching tastes. 
            - Substitution - Performing one activity makes it possible to eliminate another. 
                - Eg. Ikea full room displays and product hand tags substitute for sales associates. 
        - **Mapping your Activity System**
            - Refer to book - page 114 
    - **Continuity** - The enabler 
        - Continuity of a strategy does not mean that an organisation should stand still. As long as there is stability in the core value proposition, there can, and should, be enormous innovation in how it's delivered. 
        - Great strategies are rarely, if ever, built on a particular detailed or concrete prediction of future. 
        - Is there enough stability in the core of your strategy to allow your organisation to get good at what it does, to foster tailoring, trade-offs and fit?
        - Continuity reinforces a company's identity - it builds a company's brand, its reputation, and its customer relationships. 
        - Continuity helps suppliers, channels, and other outside parties to contribute to a company's advantage. 
        - Continuity fosters improvements in individual activities and fit across activities. It allows an organisation to build unique capabilities and skills tailored to its strategy. 


**Aim to be unique, not best. Create value, not beating rivals, is heart of competition.**